---
layout: post
title: Foreword from the confused human herself
subtitle: My first blog entry on **my** website
cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [start]
---

“The confused scientist” is a first attempt at a blog, that I assume will be looked at by my family and maybe friends. It is a story of a young researcher attempting to navigate the world of science, programming, adulthood and currently the pandemic. I am the confused scientist because, to be put plainly, am confused. And I know I am not alone.

The current world of constant opportunity, limitless higher education, and the sheer amount of papers published every year make most young researchers at least a little anxious. I am one of the many students who have pursued an academic career with not enough understanding as to what that entails. This is my journey and I guess a bit of a self-help book for the procrastinating high achievers out there.

The first parts of this website will be termed **The Bioinformatics Confusion** since these will be my attempt at understanding genetics, bioinformatics and writing a thesis for my masters. 

A little about me: I have always enjoyed wet lab work. From my incessant pursuing of instilling a biology/chemistry lab course during my last two years of high school, to my biochemistry bachelor with various wet laboratory courses and my research masters that I am on currently, I have always chosen the more literal hands-on approach.

This means I have not properly prepared myself for today’s situation: the world is ending, and I have to do a computer-based internship. The project is exciting, the method is interesting, and the supervisor is great and always willing to help. _What is the problem?_ I am extremely inexperienced in anything to do with bioinformatics.

So, I have to start from the beginning.

This blog is a way for me to keep track of things I learn and things I find interesting, in a way for all of us (me, myself, I and the imaginary reader) to really grasp what we are trying to achieve in science using bioinformatics and genomics.

