---
layout: post
title: What the [*insert profanity*] is a GWAS?
subtitle: My inexperienced experience with GWAS and beyond
cover-img: 
tags: [bioinformatics, GWAS]
comments: true
---

I will start with a little story, most of you even know how this one goes. Once upon a time a bat contracted a coronavirus, some other animal ate it and somehow it ended up in the human population. This virus slowly took over our entire world in about 2 (TWO) months and it is still running the show today. It got the name of Covid-19 and an attitude fit to rule the world.

Sure, life can return to some semblance of normality but [_start of complaining bit_] my internship was cancelled. Yes, there are worse things in the world. Yes, I understand that you, _the reader? my subconcious? my multiple personalities?_, don't actually care. My internship was going to be on growing **mini-brains** in the laboratory, **do you see why I am complaining about it being cancelled yet?** Maybe you just don't care about this and love genetics more (_assuming that's why you're here_). I have yet to find my love for it but I am hoping that through this series of blogs I will at least understand it enough to **_drum roll_** start (and complete) my replacement internship project, which is on genetics. **WOOO!** [_end of complaining bit_]

The project itself is not for this website ofcourse, but using it as a general example, I will try to explain GWAS uses because I have found a deficit in the market for such information. [gif of frantic searching on the web?]

The journey into 'GWAS' - I know what it is defined as, I know what the results look like and I now know that it is 'snips' not 'S.N.P.s'. Fantastic I'd say but definitely not close to enough.

### Let's start with GW - this stands for 'Genome-wide' 

I think of the genome as 'a huge cookbook full of recipes, some of which we know what food will be made, some of which we don't yet'. This cookbook is being written by scientists all around the world in something known as [the Human Genome Project, HGP](https://www.genome.gov/human-genome-project/)

The Genome is the collective word for ALL of our genes together (all DNA, coding, non-coding or not yet found to be coding) - understanding this term is a huge feat of science, particularly genomics and it allows us to understand biological life at it's most basic form: **The Genetic Code** (DNA). This is basically a huge string with letters, called base pairs and are A, C, G or T, that are laid out in the correct organisation to form information - much like the letters on this webpage. There are usually around 3 billion of these base pairs per cell which, if laid out, [would extend for about 2m](https://www.sciencefocus.com/the-human-body/how-long-is-your-dna/). I am only 1,67m tall so this always baffles me. Also, another fantastic fact, each cell has this - each cell has 2m worth of information inside of them. With all this, is it really surprising that we are such complex beings? and is it really surprising that mutations happen?

[pic of genome made in biorender]

### AS - Association Study

Oxford Dictionary says that _association_ means:
```
2. A connection or cooperative link between people or organizations.
3. A mental connection between things.
  3.2 The state of occurring with something else; co-occurrence.
```
In GWAS - association is the link made between phenotypes (what can be seen/observed in a person or organism) and how their genome, or DNA 'looks'. It is essentially the process of [identifying the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs, pronounced "snips") that are common to the human genome and to determine how these polymorphisms are distributed across different populations.](https://www-nature-com.vu-nl.idm.oclc.org/scitable/topicpage/genetic-variation-and-disease-gwas-682/)

[What you do for a genome-wide association study is find a lot of people who have the disease, a lot of people who don't, and who are otherwise well matched. And then, searching across the entire genome using SNPs, you try to find a place where there is a consistent difference. On average, a human gene will have 1-3 letters that differ from person to person. These differences are enough to change the shape and function of a protein, how much protein is made, when it's made, or where it's made.](https://www-nature-com.vu-nl.idm.oclc.org/scitable/topicpage/genetic-variation-and-disease-gwas-682/) I am still not 100% sure what the process is to make one such study, but I have started to understand the results that come out of it.

### The result:

Essentially, you get a table called "Summary Statistics" - this usually has the name of the risk SNPs, the positions of these in the genome, p-values, effect size and standard error values from the statistical analysis of the GWAS. Using these tables you can do a lot of fun 'beyond GWAS' analyses, in an aim to get an overview of the potential changes in the genome and to then narrow it down and fund new potential targets for analysis, understanding of disease and potential therapeutics.

[image of a summary table]

#### important - [the GWAS-identified SNPs serve only as representatives for all SNPs in the same haplotype block, and it is equally likely that other SNPs in high linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the array-identified SNPs are causal for the disease.](https://epigeneticsandchromatin.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13072-015-0050-4&hl=en&sa=T&oi=gsb-ggp&ct=res&cd=0&d=9292821921757225774&ei=5oEOYO-PB4fCmgH5tb6ABg&scisig=AAGBfm0rBU_1DiL0LBL1NGlR6SoH6IYuJA)

What does this mean? SNPs signals that may seem significant on the whole of disease-risk actually might not be the directly cause of it, but rather, the signal arises because they may be near to the actual culprit. These two SNPs may be in LD with each other (so close toegther that they will always be linked and therefore always replicated together) so the signal of one may be the signal of the other. Which is important to note, because this allows us to examine loci and the genes, variants and other SNPs in these blocks to examine the potential risks for disease. 

So we look at these summary statistics as a whole and weed out important loci that we want to study further:
[image from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7237642/&hl=en&sa=T&oi=gsb-ggp&ct=res&cd=0&d=11751527206283248287&ei=jIMOYL6bAo-Ny9YPo6--0AU&scisig=AAGBfm1uqASDt0ilFaEY392aDbewyzVXDQ]

Essentially, in conclusion, GWASs are extremely important for us to get a wider understanding of the potential changes between people and allowing us to find new functional targets for disease, without shooting in the dark. It is much like finding needles in a haystack, but at least with GWAS we can determine more easily the potential locations where the needles might be. (I say needles because most disorders are complex and multifactorial, so more than one gene, plus gene interactions, could be culprits)
[pic of needles in a haystack with regions highlighted of potential locations]
